Quantum Computing breakthrough prize
well stop the presses as we say or we
interrupt normal programming to bring
you some news and we don't do news here
at topcast we do the Timeless not timely
but here is one of those rare exceptions
and I'll try and make the timely as
Timeless as I possibly can David Deutsch
has shared in the winning of the
Breakthrough prize what is the
Breakthrough price okay so it's not the
Nobel Prize but if scientists and others
are asked to rank let's say the top
prizes in science on one hand then after
the Nobel Prize comes with a
breakthrough prize somewhere up there
anyway if you're counting on one hand
it's very top tier I mean just Google
most prestigious Awards in science David
will no doubt cringe and so might others
in my circles or even fans of topcast
but truth be told on topcast I really do
Focus almost exclusively on the ideas
David Deutsch of course regularly gets
acknowledged as the originator of many
of these ideas and the original
Expositor of them of course but I don't
tend to focus on the singular
intellectual mind that is David Deutsch
but today with the recent Award of that
prize I will take as they say in the
Australian Parliament a moment on
Indulgence when matters arise that are
outside the usual stream of business I
think this occasion warrants it and many
of the Articles written today and there
are many and if you go to my website
linked to this particular episode I will
put a list of those articles there and
they go into this kind of glowing
acknowledgment of David's contribution
to science and physics in particular
broadly at the website of the
Breakthrough prize they say right up
front quote knowledge is Humanity's
greatest asset it defines our nature and
it will shape our future the body of
knowledge is assembled over Central
centuries yet a single mind can extend
it immensely Einstein reimagined space
and time Darwin distilled the chaos of
life to a single idea Turing figured out
what it means to think great scientists
enrich us all they enable technologies
that ease our lives but they also show
us what's beyond our Horizons end quote
I don't think I've ever read such a
wonderful beginning of infinity style
paragraph outside of the beginning of
infinity in a long time the idea that
knowledge is Humanity's greatest asset
it defines our nature it will shape our
future it can show us what's beyond our
Horizons this is fantastic wonderful
deep stuff and correct correct this is
great it's a glorious introduction to
the process of science right there and
knowledge creation it at once dispels
the myth of the myth of the lone
scientist working alone in isolation and
being the giant for others to stand on
the shoulders of there is a pervasive
idea right now denigrating the whole
notion of the heroic loan mind literally
creating explanatory knowledge today the
Dogma being forced upon us is that it is
always almost entirely a collaboration
or a cooperation this may be true of the
industrial style modern academic-centric
style of incremental science that has
done the publish or perish doctrine of
careerism in The Sciences it is a shame
and it's certainly and I would never
blame not the fault of those scientists
working in those areas in the main they
are victims of a particular kind of
system but some Heroes manage to Buck
the trend through what must be said
choice and force of individual will
alone the iconoclastic individual coming
up with insights precisely because they
insist they work best alone I would say
uncontaminated perhaps by groupthink or
the need to fall in line politically
ideologically spiritual philosophical
ugly and scientifically Isaac Newton was
one Albert Einstein was one Alan Turing
was one David Deutsch is one such as
well and in being so was able to bring
the discussions around computation its
potential and its limits then regarded
as a part of pure mathematics into
physics and in doing so invented the
theory of quantum computation so he was
standing up against an establishment
that thought that this thing was just
purely pure mathematics this is the
reason David won the Breakthrough prize
for his contributions to the foundations
of that field but what's the big deal
about Quantum computation okay well
let's go to his book The Beginning of
infinity a few Choice Quotes come to
mind beginning with quote Quantum
computation which is currently believed
to be the fully Universal form of
computation happens to have exactly the
same set of computable functions as
turing's classical computation but
Quantum computation drives a coach and
horses through the classical notion of a
simple or Elementary operation it makes
some intuitively very complex things
simple end quote and later on he goes on
to explain how quantum computers
actually work and he says quote in one
type of quantum computation enormous
numbers of different computations taking
place simultaneously can affect each
other and hence contribute to the output
of a computation this is known as
Quantum parallelism in a typical Quantum
computation individual bits of
information are represented in physical
objects known as qubits Quantum bits of
which there is a large variety of
physical implementations but always with
two essential features first each qubit
has a variable that can take one of two
discrete values and second special
measurements are taken to protect the
qubits from entanglement such as cooling
them to temperatures close to absolute
zero a typical algorithm using Quantum
parallelism Begins by causing the
information carrying variables in some
of the qubits to acquire both their
values simultaneously consequently
regarding those qubits as a register
representing say a number the number of
separate instances of the register as a
whole is exponentially large 2 to the
power of the number of qubits then for a
period classical computations are
performed during which waves of
differentiation spread to some of the
other qubits but no further because of
the special measures that prevent this
hence information is processed
separately in each of that vast number
of autonomous histories finally an
interference process involving all the
affected qubits combines the information
in those histories into a single history
end quote and thus I would say the
output therefore of the quantum computer
and later he goes on to say quote in
such computations a quantum computer
with only a few hundred qubits could
perform far more computations in
parallel then there are atoms in the
visible Universe at the time of writing
quantum computers with about 10 qubits
have been constructed scaling the
technology to larger numbers is a
tremendous challenge for Quantum
technology but it is gradually being met
end quote for more on this of course
pick up the beginning of infinity just
do a word search if you've got the
Kindle version looking up Quantum
computation and go back over what David
has to say about the field he began
because he provides very clear
explanations of this my own modest
attempt to explain Quantum computation
can be found throughout my Multiverse
Series in particular part three of that
Series where I discussed the beginning
of infinity chapter 11 the Multiverse I
think it's also episode 26 of top cast
so you can go back and listen to that as
I have said in episodes of talkcast
before this work on Quantum computation
is why David Deutsch is most famous
among his peers and other physicists and
possibly the second reason I found the
ideas of David Deutsch to be worth
promoting the first was the existence of
his first book the fabric of reality
these days whenever the question of what
do you do comes up or whenever I'm
speaking to some group of younger people
about something like the history of
ideas and the present state of our
knowledge my in is typically computers I
can often ask people what they know
about the origins of this thing the
computer the smartphone they have it
allows me to explain the last name on
that list that the introduction to the
Breakthrough prize has on their website
where they name check those luminaries
Einstein Darwin and Turing there is
indeed debate about whether it was
Charles Babbage Ada Lovelace Alonso
church or Alan Turing who was most
Central to the ultimate invention of the
theory as well as the implementation of
computers or rather computation as a
field of mathematics computer science
and engineering software and Hardware
development and ultimately physics but
many if if the hand is forced nominate
Turing as the real key to all this his
approach was mathematical but assumed a
physical device he laid the most
important groundwork for modern
classical electronic universal digital
computers that today we know as laptops
desktops smartphones and watches tablets
and Teslas well the onboard computer for
the Tesla car anyway Turing was an
accomplished and unique thinker and he
gifted us the ideas that led to an
understanding of the universal classical
computer often simply called the
universal turing machine and he is the
Turing of the church Turing conjecture
the hypothesis that any physical process
can be computed and the conjecture which
Deutsch turned into the church Turing
Deutsch principle by proving it followed
from assumptions of quantum theory what
we already knew about Quantum Theory and
if we go to the Breakthrough prizes list
of names again they've got those three
names there Einstein is there the
preeminent example of someone who
redefined physics largely from the
ground up gravity was no longer a force
once Einstein was done with explaining
it it was the curvature of space-time
was no longer a constant for everyone in
the universe just ticking away sort of
outside of the universe how fast one
Moved Through Time depended upon how
fast one was moving through space
lengths are not always the same for
everyone masses or momentum or precisely
are not always constant for a given body
they too are relative to a velocity but
the speed of light is always and
everywhere constant for all observers
light was no longer a wave but something
more complex and more like a particle he
had something to do with that
entanglement is a thing so Einstein
rightly deserves the reverence he has in
the pantheon of names and likewise
Darwin of course undid the magic of
creationism and explained how life can
adapt and thus change over time through
a process of natural selection imagine
if we could speak to Turing now someone
who ushered in an entire multi-billion
dollar industry of Technology radically
transforming civilization imagine if
Einstein was still alive and we could
further question him about disrupting
the foundations of physics imagine if we
could interrogate Darwin on a podcast
with what we know now about Evolution
and let's throw in Carl popper course
who like Darwin utterly overturned the
entire field he was working in by
explaining knowledge was no longer about
parochial beliefs people had justified
in their minds that we read from the
book of nature or something like that
but rather was something truly objective
and which could be out there in physical
reality transforming the world and the
world of objects so I say this sort of
thing to people when they ask me about
what I do and they wonder where I'm
going with all this and I say this is
why I'm fascinated by the work of David
Deutsch because he has aspects of all of
those people that's why I'm fascinated
in communicating with David Deutsch and
trying to provide his ideas with more
reach let's just go through it like
Turing Deutsch has actually transformed
a billion dollar industry he laid the
foundations of the field of quantum
computation and this is why he won the
Breakthrough price okay but like
Einstein deutsche's beginning to
transform the very foundations of
physics helping along with others to
create an entirely new mode of
explanation Constructor Theory and if
anyone today is the intellectual
successor to Carl popper in philosophy
it is David Deutsch who has updated a
number of Papa's insights refining and
taking them further with notably his
notion of good explanations and his
exaltation of people as universal
knowledge creators and that is almost a
spiritual idea okay it's scientific but
what more do you want connecting people
to the cosmos that's amazing religious
people can only dream that their ideas
have something like that and in in
explaining people as knowledge creators
he has explained the unification of
Darwin's work in evolution with poppers
as both being examples of knowledge
being information that once instantiated
somewhere tends to cause itself to
remain so something both genes and good
ideas have in common so it is wonderful
and well deserve to see David Deutsch
winning the Breakthrough prize for me it
brings some additional and well-deserved
prominence to his ideas specifically
about Quantum computation but hopefully
to all of his other ideas as well which
can be world changing the optimism of
David's perspective on papyrian
epistemology as an unending stream of
explanation creation that underpins
potentially infinite progress needs to
be far more widely known it is the
counter to a pervasive pessimism his
nascent Constructor theory developed
with Chiara maleto and other
collaborators needs to be explored more
deeply it could revolutionize physics
and allow for more progress faster he's
done it before he's done it with Quantum
computation his book's the beginning of
infinity and the fabric of reality
should still be at the top of best
seller lists for their ideas are making
an impact but not enough of an impact or
fast enough David Deutsch is not a guru
he's not omniscient but he is modest and
he knows his own fallibility because
that is a trait shared by All Humans so
he will say of construct a theory it may
fail but of course we all know that it
may not so it's worth trying as he
himself has Riley quipped before string
theory was worth trying
and indeed it has been given a few
decades now hasn't it we should at least
have a generation of physicists
mathematicians biologists philosophers
and other scientists and intellectuals
to investigate where Constructor Theory
might go David Deutsch is such a modest
fallibalist that he does not actively
try to persuade anyone that he's got the
right ideas he's not dogmatic he will
not force himself into conferences or
public speaking engagements it is for
those reasons among others his ideas do
need something of a promotions
Department which is what I am beginning
to do here after all David is too busy
coming up with the actual ideas which
will transform the world so someone has
to take on the task of Outreach and I'm
excited to do it and David Deutsch is
generous but I will not say generous to
a fault because generosity is not a
fault and I don't think you can have too
much of it so his ideas are all out
there in the public domain for free all
those papers on Quantum computation oh
next to free I mean his books were far
more than what they cost and they have
already had a disproportionate impact
given what a single person can
accomplish in a given lifetime it is the
age of speaking about equality and so
forth well if the world was equal or
fair I thought you'd be a billionaire no
it is so early on in explaining all
those ideas will they go on to have the
impact the physics of Einstein in the
20th century did or classical
computation of Turing did in the 20th
century or the impact that 20th century
philosophy did well in the 21st century
David Deutsch now has all of that
covered potentially with Constructor
Theory Quantum computation and his
improvements on popper and I haven't
even mentioned his substantive
reimagining of everettian quantum theory
which taken seriously can have
foundational changes in our
understanding of physical reality at the
very deepest levels including that of
personal identity I've argued this
notion of fungibility and what it means
to be a person in the Multiverse most of
us missed living at a time when we could
have heard Einstein speaking much less
spoken to him ourselves all of us missed
the opportunity to hear Darwin we can
only wish to have spoken to or have
heard more from Turing and while we can
still hear popper in his own words in
recordings today we can't hear any more
from him but we do have David Deutsch
this is something I have said to people
for many years and I have the sense they
have sometimes gone away with a shrug of
not really taking my implication
seriously perhaps this award will help
to do some of that work for me from now
on it only acknowledges the advances in
Quantum computation that he made and
though that is a big part of David's
work it's far from all of it the whole
of it is extremely diverse almost as
diverse as it can possibly be for it
covers the very fabric of reality it
itself is a beginning of infinity if
you're fascinated with one part of it
explore the rest there really is no end
to it once you begin and if you've taken
seriously the implications of what I've
said here now then why aren't you
following David on Twitter at David
Deutsch just like his name at David
Deutsch o x f short for Oxford and why
aren't you keeping up with what's
happening at the website
www.constructortheory.org and why don't
you have copies of these books bought
for family and friends one day one day
you might be able to say with a knowing
smile and a little bit of intellectual
Pride when the guy at the local phone
store is trying to upsell you to the
Apple quantum Q phone Pro Max and begins
to explain how it works using the
Multiverse as explained by that guy on
the new 50-pound British banknote yeah
yeah you say I know of David Deutsch I
knew of him way before we all had
quantum computers and Universal
Constructors everywhere I've even read
his book don't you mean books since the
salesperson
so congratulations to David Deutsch for
winning the Breakthrough prize at the
website for this episode link to in the
description here's a list of the
Articles so far written about David's
latest award many of them do a very fine
job of explaining for a layperson the
fundamentals of quantum computation and
why it's important until next time when
we return to regular programming bye-bye